In previous videos, we explored some of
the basic commands used in SQL queries,
focussing on how we might extract
data from a single table.
However, the real power of SQL is that
we can take advantage of the relational
structure in our database, and bring
together multiple ideas into one dataset
that we can use for subsequent analysis.
So today we're going to talk about how to
do that using a family of commands that
join tables together.
Before we jump in let's
revisit the idea of aliases
that we introduced when we
talked about data aggregations.
We saw that we could rename any column or
aggregate in our select by adding as,
and a new name like this.
Select count star as
num_rows from transactions.
It turns out that I can also use aliases
to rename whole tables as well as columns.
This will important when we start
talking about multiple tables,
especially when those tables have
column names that are the same.
Using aliases helps us specify
which table a column belongs to.
The syntax for table aliases
is a little different than for
column aliases, but the idea is the same.
Consider one of our
earlier example queries.
Select channel, product,
price from transactions.
If I wanted to clearly specify
the table associated with each column,
I could of written the query this way.
Select transactions.channel,
transactions.product,
transactions.price, from transactions.
Note that I more completely described
each field in the select statement using
the convention table name dot field name.
This makes the table
association really clear.
But as you might imagine, it can get
tedious to type out the whole table name
every time I reference a column.
This is where table aliases come in.
Let's say I simply want to refer to
the transactions tabel as table A.
I could write the same query this way.
Select a.channel, a.product, a.price,
from transactions space a.
In this case, space a is my alias for
the transactions table.
Note that unlike column aliases,
I don't need to use the word as
between the table and its alias.
I can if I want to, but it's usually
more efficient just to use a space.
Again, if I'm extracting data from
a single table, using the table name, or
an alias all over the place
is a bit redundant.
However, it's really helpful when
we bring other tables into the mix.
So let's move on and look at how we
extract data from more than one table.
Remember that in a relational database
the linkage between tables is defined by
a foreign key.
That is, we have the same column or
at least the same type of
column in both tables.
Often, the foreign key in one table links
to a primary key in another table, but
it doesn't have to be the case.
In this short-hand diagram, you could
see logically how two tables, A and B,
are linked using the fields A.Key and
B.Key.
In SQL,
we use an operation called the JOIN
to allow us to access more
than one table at a time.
There are a number of different
types of joins that can be applied.
Depending on what type of
output we're hoping to get.
We'll cover the three most common
types of joins first, outer joins,
inner joins and left joins.
This venn diagram illustrates
logically what these joins do.
The inner join only returns rows of data
where there is a common key value match.
In other words,
when the specific values in the key
field are the same in both tables.
The full outer join returns all rows
of data from both tables, whether or
not there is a key value
match between them.
Finally, the left join returns
all rows of data in one table and
adds data from any rows in the second
table where there is a key value match.
Another way to think about what
joins do is that they try to match
rows of data between table and sort of
align them up using the key relationship.
With an inner join, I only give data
back if the rows line up properly.
With an outer join, I get back both
rows that line up and those that don't.
Meaning that I'll have some rows on
my output dataset that only had data
on one side, and other rows that
only had data on the other side
in addition to those
with data on both sides.
The left join is sort of in the middle.
It makes sure that I have all rows
of data from one side, but may or
may not have data from the other side.
Some examples of join should make
this clear, but before we do that
let's look at the sin tax of sequel
codes when using join clause.
Assume I want data from two tables named
table one and table two respectfully.
The sin tax for
a full outer join looks like this,
I select some number of counts from table
one and table two using aliases a and
b that I define in the subsequent clauses.
I select from table one alias a, and
full our join table two alias to b.
Finally I define the field from each table
on which I want the join to take place
by saying on a.key equals b.key.
The syntax for an inner join and
for a left join are similar,
except that I replace full outer join with
inner join and left join respectively.
Let's set up an example to
see how these joins work.
Once again,
we'll start with our transactions table.
But now we'll introduce a second table.
Let's call this table products,
which has one row for each product and
contains the product and two attributes
about each product, material and medium.
Using our table short hand, we can see
the relationship between the tables.
They both contain the product field, which
is the foreign key in the transactions
table and
the primary key in the products table.
Let's say that I just wanted to
augment my transactions data by
adding attributes about
each product purchased.
I'd write a query that looks like this.
Select a.star, b.star from transactions a,
left join products b,
on a dot product equals b.product.
I've chosen a left joint here, because I
want to start with all my transactions on
the left, and only join in data from
the products table, if there is a match.
In this case, there's a match for
each transaction, and
I get the following output data set.
Here I have all the data from
the original transactions table, but
I've added the material and
medium columns from the product table.
Know that each time the same product
comes up in the transactions table,
the same information from the product
table's included in the output table.
So what if I chosen inner join instead?
In this case, it would have made
no difference as there was a match
on product table for every type of
product and the transactions table.
Or what if we were missing
information in the products table?
For example, what if my products
table were missing magazines.
With a left join, all the transactions
would be in the table.
But the values for the last two columns
will be missing in those rows like this.
But if I used an inner join, the rows for
magazines will be missing entirely.
If I needed to see information
about all transactions,
I wouldn't get what I needed.
With the left join, I'm able to see
exactly what information I'm missing.
In data analysis, this is often precisely
the type of thing I'm looking for.
Personally, I have a strong bias towards
using left joins over inter joins when
possible, especially for data analytics.
I can always throw away data later,
but it's much harder to
spot missing data problems,
if they're already removed in your query.
What about a full outer join?
Let's say I wrote this
query as a full outer join.
The dataset returned might look like this.
Note that there are two
products in products table for
which there are no transactions.
These products show up on the right
side of the table with missing
values in the transactions
tables fields on the left.
I may or may not be interested in
understanding which products have not
transactions, but
if I were I might consider using a full
outer join to help point them out.
Generally speaking, however,
full outer joins are much less common
than ; left joins and inner joins.
One thing you may have noticed to my
output dataset is that even though I
selected all columns from
both tables using a.star and
b.star, the field in my own
cross only appeared once.
Some SQL engines are smart enough to
realise that including the same values
from both tables of redundant.
Others will in fact return values for
each table in separate columns.
We've used one column here for simplicity.
We also mentioned earlier that
inner joins, outer joins, and
left joins are just a few of the types
of joins that we can execute.
Here's a more complete set of joins and
the logic that defines each one.
We won't go through these here, but you
may occasionally find yourself in need of
these other joins depending on
the outcome you're trying to achieve.
Okay, before we wrap up,
let's take our example a step further and
incorporate some of the other ideas
we've learned thus far around SQL.
It's often the case that I add data to one
table from another table to facilitate
some sort of aggravation based on
something that's only in the second table.
For example, let's say I wanted
a query that did the following.
Return the average price of products
by medium, exclude transactions from
the reseller channel, only include medium
values where the average price is greater
than 10, and sort the results from highest
average price to the lowest average price.
We could write the following query,
which incorporates almost every
idea we've discussed so far.
Here we select the grouping field
b.medium, and the aggregate avg a.price,
and we define an alias for
the average price as avg_price.
We select from transactions a and left
join products b on a.price equals b.price.
We filter resellers using where
a.channel is not equal to reseller,
then group by b.medium.
We further filter the aggregated data
by adding having avg_price greater
than 12.50.
Finally we order by avg_price,
desc to make sure the data is sorted
from highest to lowest average price.
When we run this query,
we get the following output data set.
We have two rows in the data set.
Visual medium with an average
price of 12.61, and
audio visual medium with
an average price of 12.45.
If you can, pause here and
try to work your way through
the steps in this query manually.
Can you tell which step or
steps didn't actually make a difference?
If you've got it, then congratulations.
You understand enough about sequel to
accomplish a pretty large percentage of
the queries we actually used to pull data.
These basic commands along with a little
creativity can take you a long way.
In the remainder of this module,
we'll look at a few more commands and
functions in sequel and see how we can
write more elaborate quarries to extract
data in more valuable ways.